Good morning.
My name is Paul Marcos.
It's great to see so many
of you here this morning,
even you, Dan.
We have a terrific mix of people in
the crowd here at WWDC this week.
We've got a whole bunch of people that
are familiar with the Mac already,
like our friend Dan here.
And as such,
you're familiar with the operating system
and the tools and the language that we
use for developing iPhone applications.
And that gives you a great leg up.
And then on the other hand,
we have a whole bunch of new
people to Apple and to WWDC,
and a number of you are coming from
other mobile device platforms like
Windows Mobile or Symbian or Blackberry.
And you guys understand the issues that
face mobile application development,
things like limited resources,
a small screen size,
the challenge of building a
usable and friendly application
on a small device like that.
And so we have this new platform now
that faces all of those same challenges,
but it's built on top of that great
technology from Mac OS X that so
many of you are familiar with.
And that's what we're here
to talk about this morning.
So this presentation is going to
be mostly conceptual in nature.
We're going to look at
a little bit of code.
We'll do a little bit of interface stuff.
But what I'm covering is primarily
the designs behind Cocoa Touch on
the phone and iPhone OS development.
There are a couple things that
are helpful for you to know about
going into iPhone app development.
And the two primary ones are just
object-oriented programming in general,
and whether that's from Java or C++,
or even some of the scripting
languages that use object-oriented
principles these days.
And the second is the C language syntax.
The language that we use is C-based,
so understanding things like pointers
and memory management is really helpful.
So the topics that I'm going to
cover here this morning are just
a real brief overview of the OS.
You heard a lot about it yesterday.
I can add a couple points to that.
And then I want to go
through three steps.
And I remember when I joined the iPhone
team about two and a half years ago,
I thought what the heck am I doing
developing for a mobile device?
I've never done that in my life.
I had come out of the
Mac OS X desktop world,
and, you know,
I was very intimidated and scared.
And typically when I'm
faced with a new platform,
I like to break it down into
three steps that I try to perform.
The first is I just want
to get something on screen.
I just want to get the app to
launch and get something on
screen so that I understand,
you know,
the tools that are required to get that
far and how to get something on screen.
And then the next thing,
I want to make it do
something very simple,
just a button, hello world,
something really, really basic.
And then with all of
those pieces in place,
then I can kind of embark on building
a mobile device that I can use to
build the rest of the application
and making it do something.
And so in my case,
when I joined the team,
I started on that app.
I went through these simple steps.
And that app that I had started and
used as my beginning ultimately went
on to become the Photos application
that we ship on the phone today.
So it turned out I was able to
develop on a mobile platform.
And it was actually very familiar,
as you'll see here.
So let's just jump in with
a quick overview of the OS.
And as you saw yesterday,
we have this layer diagram that
we use showing all the different
layers of the operating system.
And the important points are the
lower three are the same as Mac OS X.
So for those of you coming
from that direction,
these are very familiar.
They're the same layers.
As iPhone app developers,
we're going to spend most of our
time at the Cocoa Touch layer,
because that's where most of the services
that we use and that we need exist.
And the point that I wanted to add here
was for each of these lower layers,
you can feel free to dive down as needed.
And in some cases,
you may need to open a raw BSD socket.
So you can just open that directly if
you have existing code or whatever.
Or at the core services layer,
you may need to use SQLite.
So you have those APIs.
So you may kind of need
to dive down for those.
Or even at the media layer,
if you're doing something with audio,
we have audio libraries
for you to use there.
So while we'll spend most of our
time at the Cocoa Touch layer,
just keep in mind,
you can dive down as needed to any
of these other layers that you need.
So talking about the Cocoa Touch layer,
it's broken into two frameworks.
The lower level one is
Foundation Framework.
And this is, again,
the same as that exists on Mac OS X.
So if you're familiar with that,
you already know a whole
bunch of these APIs.
It's all the same.
It's a subset of what we have there.
And in this framework,
we have object wrappers
around basic data structures,
arrays, and dictionaries.
And then we also have object wrappers
around a bunch of system services,
like accessing the file system
or some networking APIs.
So a lot of kind of lower
level non-UI pieces.
The upper portion of
Cocoa Touch is UIKit Framework.
And that's where the machinery for
running the application exists.
That's where the windows exist
and the views that you're seeing.
So we've added some APIs for accessing
the device of this same layer.
So I've used the term
framework a couple times,
so I want to just talk a little
bit about what a framework is.
So to Apple, a framework is a way of
packaging our system interfaces.
And it's physically a way
of packaging it on disk,
where we have a directory that
contains not only the binary for
the code that is in that framework,
but also any associated resources,
like the header files that you need to
build and link against that framework,
or things like in UIKit, the resources,
the images and sounds,
and all the pieces that we need to
actually present the UI at runtime.
And since we ship in
now a zillion languages,
we also have all the localizations.
So it's this nice self-contained
unit where all of the pieces that
are associated with the framework go.
On Mac OS X, you're probably familiar
with System Library Framework
in the file system.
When you install the iPhone OS SDK,
they're installed in the
platform SDK in this path.
And as an app developer,
you live on top of the frameworks,
and there's this notion of
living with the frameworks,
and most importantly,
working with the frameworks,
not against them.
And so what do I mean by that?
Well, for the people that are new
to the platform especially,
you may come to Cocoa Touch,
and it's very natural to try to
apply the same design approaches
that you've applied on other
platforms to this platform.
And what you may find is that you may
encounter some impedance mismatch with
the way that you've done things in the
past and how we do them in Cocoa Touch.
So it's important to step back and
try to get your head around kind of
the big picture design of Cocoa Touch,
and that's what we're going to
be trying to do here this morning
and the course of this week.
For example,
a lot of the classes in the frameworks
that we provide are intended just
to be used right out of the box.
No modification.
You just take them, you use them,
they do something, and that's great.
Other classes are explicitly
intended to be subclassed.
They provide some generic behavior,
but really can't do anything
without the use of a subclass.
And one of the best ways to understand
which of these cases you're looking
at is just to use our documentation.
So I'll give a plug to the
documentation that we have.
In particular,
there are two documents that
I wanted to call out that are really
important for you to understand.
The first is the
Cocoa Fundamentals Guide.
And while written for the
Mac OS X Cocoa framework,
so many of the designs are
the same in Cocoa Touch.
So it just gives a great basis
for a number of the designs,
defines a lot of the terminology and
whatnot that we use on the phone as well.
And then the second is the
iPhone OS Programming Guide,
which is more specific
to the phone itself.
So two great documents give
you an understanding of what
the frameworks are all about.
So the design patterns that we're
going to talk about here this morning,
there are three that
I'm going to focus on.
The first, you've already heard
some about each of these.
Model View Controller.
delegation, and target action.
So let's just jump in with
Model View Controller.
The fundamental premise
of Model-View-Controller,
which you may already be familiar
with from other platforms,
is a separation of the
model and the view.
And on the model side,
you have kind of the back end
state of your application.
The data that's stored,
some basic logic of your application,
but nothing in the UI.
And then on the view side,
you have the presentation of that data.
And you want to try to encapsulate both
of these things separately so that they
don't need to know much about each other.
Ideally, nothing about each other.
But then you have this kind of
division here where the rubber needs
to meet the road at some point.
How does that happen?
Well, that's the job of the
controller in the middle.
And what the controller does is
mediate between these two worlds.
It pulls data out of the model and
hands it to the view for presentation.
And then as the user
interacts with the view,
it intercepts those interactions and
performs some manipulation of the data.
So looking at how this breakdown
of Model-View-Controller
applies to the frameworks,
we see on the model side,
we have foundation framework.
And as I said, that's the non-UI
portion of the framework.
And then on the view side, we have UIKit,
and in particular, the UIView subclasses.
And we'll talk about
UIView a little bit later.
And then in the center,
since we only have two frameworks,
we had to find a place for it,
the controllers actually exist in UIKit.
And we've put the idea of controllers
under this umbrella that we call
"view controllers." And you'll hear
that term in the iPhone sessions
over and over because it's really,
really fundamental and critical.
But these pieces are
only half of the picture.
The other half is your code,
which exists in all three places.
Right, and so there's this notion of
your code with the framework code,
and that's what makes up the
building blocks for the application.
And when we write our apps,
and we've written a bunch of apps,
we've kind of strived to keep this
breakdown of the model view controller.
And we try to do that because it
really helps produce cleaner code.
It forces us to think about,
for particular chunks of functionality,
where does it exist?
Is it in the model?
Is it in the view?
Is it in the controller?
We try to maintain a discipline of
keeping clean APIs between these pieces.
It helps with just understanding
how something works,
especially as we get new
engineers joining teams.
They can kind of easily break
down functionality in an
application and get a quicker,
a quick understanding
of how the code works,
how it's structured.
It makes it easier to test
when you have these nice APIs,
these well-defined boundaries.
You can do things like write unit
tests and test the functionality
of just an isolated component.
We've also found that it
helps with reusability,
so that when you do define
these modular components,
you can use them in ways that you never
foresaw when you initially designed them.
And for us,
that happened when we decided to
put a public API on top of our APIs.
We realized we already have a whole
bunch of these modular units that
we could expose the APIs and give
functionality to you very easily.
And perhaps most importantly,
is when you do follow this
model view controller paradigm,
it just naturally aligns you with the
way that Cocoa Touch works and kind of
puts you in the same buckets and puts
you amongst the friends and classes
that we use in those same buckets.
So that's just a brief overview
of the fundamental concept behind
Cocoa Touch and Cocoa on the desktop,
Model View Controller.
And what I wanted to do next is
just start off with step number one.
Let's get something on screen.
Now, in order to get something on screen,
we need to understand the
tools that we're using.
And as you saw yesterday,
we have some awesome tools for
developing apps on the phone.
We have Xcode for editing your source
code and maintaining your project,
Interface Builder for laying
out your interface and
graphically connecting objects.
The iPhone simulator for
doing rapid application
development all on one screen,
right in the convenience of your own Mac.
You can just do it right on your screen.
It's really easy.
You can turn around, compile, link,
debug.
It's a great environment.
And then when you need to,
flip a switch and you're
running on the device.
So these three we're
going to look at today,
and then the fourth, instruments,
which is kind of outside of
the scope of this presentation,
for doing performance
analysis and tuning.
So let me just start off
with a quick demo just to set
the stage for our concepts.
And the demo that I'm going to be
working on is a very simple app.
If I can wake my notebook up.
It's a hello world class application.
So it's very simple, again,
just to kind of set the
stage for discussion.
And it's basically just going to be a
light bulb on the screen with a switch
and a label that we update some status.
So I'm going to bring up Xcode here.
We're just going to start
a brand new project.
And the template I'm going to use is
this view-based application template,
which is a very generic starting point.
So we'll pick that.
I'm going to save this
as demo on my desktop.
And here we have our project.
So as you saw,
we have a number of classes in here.
We're going to come back to the code
later because our primary goal right
now is just to get something on screen.
We have a couple resources,
which are the interface files
that we'll be working with.
And I have a few additional
resources on the desktop,
just some images.
So I'm just going to drag
those into my resources bucket,
tell Xcode to copy them into my project.
And there we go.
So in this template,
we have two interface
files that get created.
And I just wanted to point out the
first one is this main window nib.
We're not actually going
to do any work in here.
I just want to call
attention to a couple things.
One is that in the document window,
we have a handful of objects.
And these objects live in the nib,
or they may be proxies for other
objects that live in the application.
And we'll come back to talking about a
couple of these objects in a little bit.
The other main thing that we have
in this particular nib is the
main window for the application.
And again, we're not going to do
anything with the main window.
And generally,
you don't need to know very
much about the main window.
Just that it's here in the main nib.
It gets created automatically.
And it's the container in which all of
the views that you build go inside of.
And in this case,
we see the contents of our
main window is this view.
NIB is telling us this particular
view in this template is loaded from
this demo view controller nib file.
And that's actually where
we're going to do our work.
So let me go open that.
So that's this second nib here,
this demo view controller.
And again, this nib has a couple objects
up here that we'll come back to.
And then it has our view file,
which is our blank
canvas for us to work in.
And the first thing I want to
do is actually the background
in this template is white.
The images I'm using
have a black background,
so I want to change the background color.
So if I go into the Tools menu and
bring up the Attributes Inspector,
I can just change the
background of this view,
and I'm going to change it to black.
There we go.
And now I just want to pull out
a couple of interface pieces.
So I go over to the library window,
switch to the media,
and you see IB has recognized those
resources that I dragged into my project.
And I'm just going to drag
out one of the images,
this beautiful light bulb.
And then the other two interface
elements that I want to pull out
are the switch that I'll use for
turning the light bulb on and off,
and then a text label.
And one subtle thing-- I think
IB is such an awesome tool.
I love it.
You notice as I'm
dragging this text label,
it's black.
And then as I drag it
over the black background,
IB notices and inverts
it so it turns it white,
which is just really nice,
nice little touch.
IB's full of those.
So let me set some default state here.
Turn the light on.
Oops, center that.
And since the light actually is off,
I'm going to change the state again
in the attributes inspector so
that the default position is off.
So now we have some interface laid out.
That's all we're going to do in
Interface Builder at the moment.
I'm going to go back over to Xcode.
And the other thing I wanted to add
was just an icon for our application.
So I'm going to go to the Get Info
window for the target we're building.
And on the Properties tab,
just fill in the icon name.
And I think that should be it.
Let me just build and go there.
We'll see what happens
if I missed anything.
So the app is built.
The simulator launches automatically.
It's installed in the simulator.
And there we go.
Now we have our interface.
We've succeeded in step number one.
We've seen the tools.
We've gotten the application built.
And we've got something on screen.
It doesn't do anything because
we haven't hooked anything up.
But that's a good starting point.
And it sets the stage for--
if we go back to slides now--
So if we look at what we saw,
what we got out of that,
basically we got the
application infrastructure.
We got the scaffolding of an application
from which we're going to start to build.
We got the main window loaded,
and we had that empty interface
that came out of the template,
and we started adding stuff to it.
One note, there's a handful of templates
that come with the SDK,
and you should kind of take a look
at each one of those to understand,
you know, for any given application,
which one is the best starting point.
This one is fairly vanilla.
The other ones have a little
bit more structure to them.
So kind of get to know
what the templates are.
So what I wanted to go through now
was kind of what happened when the
application launched and set the
stage for the application lifecycle.
And as I mentioned,
we are a C-based language,
and as just about every
C-based program in the world,
we start life in main.
We have a main function
that's in the template.
You can see it.
It doesn't do very much.
It basically hands off
control immediately to UIKit.
And in particular, it calls a function
called UIApplicationMain.
And that's kind of where the
application really starts to take off.
One of the main things
UI Application Main does is it
creates the UI Application Object,
which is a shared global object that
effectively runs the application.
It's kind of in charge
of all the app behavior.
And at this point in time,
at the launch time,
its primary goal is to get us to the
event loop as quickly as possible,
because that defines
what your launch time is.
And we want our launch times
to be as short as possible so
that the apps feel responsive,
And we're now listening to the user.
But along the way,
we do a couple very important things.
One of the most important things is
we'll create this object on the side
called the UI Application Delegate.
And it's an object that works
with the UI Application Object.
And as you can see, it's a delegate.
So what is a delegate?
We're going to kind of take a
little side turn here and talk
about delegates a little bit.
And this is the second kind of key
concept that I want to cover here.
So what a delegate is,
delegation is a way for you to
customize complex behaviors.
And you can do so in two ways.
One is you can provide input
kind of along the course of
a behavior that's being done.
So you can kind of fine tune the
generic behavior that UIKit provides.
And the second is there are clearly
defined call outs for kind of
beginning before something happens,
you get a call out,
and then after something
is done being performed,
you get a second call out.
So you kind of have these interesting
before and after points where you can
hook in code and customize behavior.
Delegation is seen as,
you can look at it as an
alternative to subclassing.
Where subclassing, sometimes you may want
to override a behavior,
but you don't want to
override the entire behavior.
You may just want to kind of
interject certain things in the
context of a superclass's method.
And if you want to do it in the
middle of a superclass's method,
you really can't do that with a subclass.
So using delegates kind of gives you
those interesting points in the context
of the superclass's implementation where
you can interject some code and behavior.
Another problem with subclassing
is it may be confusing,
like, when do you invoke your
superclasses implementation?
Do you have to do it at the beginning?
Can you do it at the end?
Can you do it in the middle?
Can you do it multiple times?
Do you have to do it at all?
I mean, usually the documentation
will make this clear,
but sometimes it doesn't.
And by separating these behaviors,
and especially these chunks of code
that get interjected in the context
of a superclass's implementation,
it keeps specific logic
in the right place.
The generic behavior in the
superclass's UI kit implementation,
and then specific code that's interjected
kind of off on the side in your code.
So I wanted to go through an
example of how delegate works,
just to give you a flavor of the kind of
interchange between the UIKit objects or
the framework objects and your objects.
And the example I'm going
to use is a text field.
So it's a pretty simple example,
although editing text is, while simple,
made up of a number of steps.
So in UIKit,
there's an object called UITextField,
which is the visual
representation of the text field.
And it allows for a delegate.
And when the user comes in and clicks on
the text field-- and I should also say,
throughout the course of this week,
all of the engineers
are going to say click.
And when we say click, we mean tap.
We think of it roughly the same.
It's a single event.
You tap on something.
So just in your mind, when we say click,
think tap.
So the user comes in
and taps on the field.
And before the field is
actually made editable,
the UI text field will check
in with the delegate and say,
should I begin editing?
And this is a point where
you can refine this behavior.
And you can determine,
given the current state
in my application,
is it OK to allow the user to edit?
And you can indicate yes or no.
And so in this case, we're going to say,
yeah, sure, go ahead.
And then just before the text
field is actually made editable
and the user starts editing,
the text field will come
back to its delegate and say,
OK, I'm about to begin editing.
And so this is kind of your before
hook that you can hook into.
And you can do any kind of setup
or preparation that you need to
in order to edit this text field.
And then after that,
the text field is made editable.
The user can edit the text.
And when focus goes away
from the text field,
then the UI text will come
back to its delegate and say,
OK, now we're done editing.
The operation is finished.
And so you can take the
value out of the text field.
You can respond to it in
whatever way you need to.
And that's kind of a very typical flow
of a framework object going to its
delegate and asking for permission or
clarification of what should be done.
And then a before the action
and after the action callback.
Thank you.
And you'll see delegates
used throughout our APIs.
And here's just a small handful of them.
The text field in the middle,
the UI table views,
even things like web views have delegates
and participate in the complex operation
of displaying and loading a web page.
So let's go back to our lifecycle
diagram and drill into a little bit
more detail of how the UI application
object and its delegate work.
And as I said,
the UI application delegate is your code.
So you specify or you provide
the code for this object.
And it conforms to the
UI application delegate protocol.
And when we say the word protocol,
all that really is is it's a
specification of a set of methods
that an object agrees to implement.
Many of the methods in a protocol may be
optional and they're defined as optional.
Some of them are required.
The required ones, obviously,
you have to implement.
And in the UI Application Delegate case,
here's just a couple of
the methods that we have.
UI Application did finish launching.
And that's an interesting one because
it's the first point where your
code gets control of execution.
And you almost always implement it.
In fact,
it's implemented in the template.
I'll show you that in a second.
It's a very, very common place for
you to put some code.
And then another very common place
is in application will terminate.
And that's kind of the last
stop before the app exits.
If we look at the details
of the application delegate
and the application object,
what happens at launch time,
the UI application will load
that main nib file that we saw.
And along the way,
it creates that main window.
And one of those objects that
I mentioned was in that interface
file is actually the delegate itself.
That's actually where it lives.
And when that nib file is loaded,
that's when the application comes into
existence and is actually instantiated.
and it gets set as the
application delegate.
So once these things are done,
then the UI application calls over
to the application delegate and calls
the application didFinishLaunching
method if you implement it.
And in that method,
typically you will load some
state and then configure the UI,
whether that's the initial time your
app is launched or you may be returning
the user to whatever point they were at
the last time they launched your app.
And the important point to
note here is the main window,
while it's been created,
has not been shown on screen yet.
So you can do any of this setup,
and it's before the user sees anything.
So whatever setup you make,
that's the first thing they'll see.
So once you're done here,
then the main window
is brought on screen,
control flows back over to
the UI application object,
and then we drop into
the main event loop,
and the app is up and running.
So just to cover this briefly,
UIKit drives the process.
In reality, UIKit is really--it's
in the driver's seat.
You primarily are just
kind of along for the ride.
You're giving a lot of directions
and telling us where to go,
but UIKit is really
driving the machinery.
We've seen how you can customize the
behavior in UIKit using delegates,
and in particular,
the UI application and its delegate
work together through a set of
methods where you can refine
the behavior of the application.
So that's step number one.
We've got something on screen.
Now let's talk about
making it do something,
because that's the interesting part.
And in order to make it do something,
we have to cover two topics.
The first is the language that we use,
because we're going to write some code.
And the second is how to actually connect
the view to the controller in order
to respond to the user in some way.
So the language that
we use is Objective-C.
For those of you that
haven't seen Objective-C,
it's a superset of ANSI C.
So it's based on C.
And on top of straight C,
it adds object-oriented extensions.
And it tries to do so in as
minimal a fashion as possible in
order to add these object-oriented
principles-- encapsulation,
polymorphism, inheritance,
all the things we know and
love about object orientation.
It's single inheritance.
It has a dynamic runtime,
so we can do things like the
UI application object can ask
whether an object implements
application did finish launching.
We can do that runtime dynamically.
And we've gone to great lengths to
prevent throwing in a kitchen sink,
piling on a ton of syntax.
We try to keep it as simple as possible.
It's a very easy language to learn.
I've seen a ton of Apple engineers
that are new to the company
come in and learn it.
And one of the common things that
people ask when they come into Apple is,
you know, oh, I'm going to have this
ramp-up time with Objective-C.
You know, I'm going to need a week or so.
And in many cases, like,
by the end of the day,
they're writing Objective-C code
and feel very comfortable.
And I think it's a fun language.
It's very lighthearted.
It's easy to learn.
It's fun to use.
I love it.
And I hope you will, too.
For those of you that are familiar
with it and already love it,
I should point out we
support Objective-C 2.0,
which was added in Leopard.
So things like properties and
dot syntax and fast enumeration,
we have support for those.
One notable exception is we do
not support garbage collection.
So on the phone,
memory is managed manually.
And that's critical.
And we spend a lot of time
focusing on memory management,
making sure we're not leaking,
making sure that we're allocating
memory only when we need it and
only the amount that we need.
because we have limited resources,
so it's important to keep
your memory under control.
So let's just look through
a couple simple examples.
So in C++ and Java,
you'd invoke a syntax method like this.
In Objective-C, slightly different,
same pieces involved.
You'll see the square brackets
around the message send.
You'll come to love square brackets.
They're a great thing in the language.
And if I may,
I hope not to offend anybody,
but I consider myself part of this crowd.
But for the older folks in the crowd,
you might recognize some of this.
It's similar to Smalltalk.
In fact, Objective-C has kind of a
heritage from Smalltalk.
Another example, looking at a method
called with arguments.
So here's what we'd call subtract
with a couple arguments passed.
Here you see a little bit, again,
slight difference.
Some identifiers that precede
the arguments that are passed in.
And this is a subtle thing and
frequently sparks religious debates,
but we think it's really important.
And it helps just produce readable code,
highly readable code.
And when you couple this language feature
with the design that we have of our APIs,
you find that our APIs are very verbose.
We're not afraid to use our words.
And we try to really
make our APIs expressive.
We also try-- and this is sometimes
borders on the ridiculous-- we
try to be grammatically correct.
We have a subject and a verb.
You know,
we pay attention to these things.
We have debates at Apple about
these points of the API design.
But we take our APIs very,
very seriously.
We try to make them highly consistent.
In fact, you'll see consistency not just
from the Cocoa Touch layer,
but even the layers beneath it.
We try to maintain a consistency so
that when you do encounter a new API,
it feels familiar.
And when you see new code,
you can just start reading it
and get an understanding of it.
Another example of declaring a method.
Again, slightly different syntax,
same basic principles.
Is it an instance method?
Is it a class method?
What are the arguments?
What's the return type?
It's all the same basic C types,
C stuff that you would
need to put in there.
So there's a session on
Objective-C that would be a great
thing to go to if you're familiar,
if you're new to the language especially.
And then there's a lab on
the Objective-C 2.0 specific
features that have been added.
And I wanted to point out about the labs.
The labs are this remarkable opportunity,
especially for the folks
that are here in person,
where you get to sit down and
meet the engineers one-on-one.
You can ask questions,
and these are the people
that designed this stuff,
so we generally have an
idea of how it works.
You can ask us any questions.
We're happy to talk about
the design of your apps,
how you should use the APIs effectively,
pitfalls,
things that you might want to avoid,
stuff like that.
So go to the labs.
They're really, really awesome.
We've got a ton of engineers here.
They're a great, great opportunity to
take advantage of them.
There's also some documentation.
Again, documentation is great
that we have on this.
There's an Objective-C 2.0
language guide,
covers all the details
of the language itself.
And then another guide that I wanted
to point out is this object-oriented
programming with Objective-C.
And as you look at any kind of
object-oriented environment,
everybody has their own spin on it.
They have a certain set of terminology,
they use the terminology
in a certain way,
and we're no different.
And the important thing about this
document is it gives you our view of
object-oriented programming from the
perspective of Objective-C and also
from the perspective of our frameworks.
So again, it helps with that step back,
get a big picture around the frameworks,
the designs that we use,
and reduce that impedance mismatch.
So that's the language that we have.
And now let's talk about how we
connect the views to the controllers.
So that we can listen,
we can respond to the user input.
And so the user interacts
with the device,
with the user interface
through the views,
and they do so through
three primary means.
One is through standard controls,
the buttons and sliders
and switches and things.
The second one is through
custom views that you create,
and whether that's custom controls or a
custom view where you're presenting data
in a certain way and allowing the user to
interact with that in a particular way.
And then the third way is through
sensors on the phone and the iPod Touch,
through sensors like the accelerometer,
where the user can just turn the device,
and that's a form of input indicating
that they want to either rotate
the interface or that they need
to see something in landscape mode.
And so the controller objects
tend to be the ones that are
responding to that input and
actually performing some action.
So the views that the user interacts
with are instances of the UIView class.
And UIView provides two key roles.
The first is it just gives
you that rectangular region
on screen to present content,
whether it's an image or content
that you're drawing on the fly.
It's just that space in the screen
real estate that you have to work in.
And then the second thing UIView does
is it responds--it handles the events.
It's kind of where the basic
event mechanism is hooked in.
And one note on the event side,
UI views are single touch by default.
So when you create a UI view,
it will only respond to a single finger.
If you do put two fingers
down or more fingers down,
it will only respond to
the first one that we see.
The other ones will
basically be dead to us.
There's a switch that you can
flip to turn on multi-touch,
but just keep that in mind that
views are single touch by default.
In the context of responding to the user,
the interesting subclass
of UIView is UIControl.
And both UIView and UIControl
are abstract classes.
In the case of UIControl,
we have this whole collection of
controls that we have out of the box,
all the common things
that you would expect.
And what UI Control adds to the
party is the notion of responding
to events and invoking actions.
And the events that it responds
to are things like touchdown,
touch up, drag events,
or in the case we're going
to use here of the switch,
just a simple value change.
So we've gone from off to on.
And in response to particular events,
a control will invoke an action
commonly on the controller.
And we've given a name to this idea,
and that's target action.
And this is the third main concept
that I wanted to cover here today.
So simply put,
target action is just connecting
this control to the controller.
And in the example I'm going to use,
the event that's going to be
generated is a value changed event.
So when the switch moves and turns on,
the value is changed.
And in response to that event,
the control will invoke
an action on the target,
the target here being
our controller object.
And the action that it's going to
invoke is this toggle light method.
And we'll see that in code in a second.
And this notion of the target action,
controls responding to an event,
invoking an action on its target,
is the same as what's in Cocoa on OS X.
So for those folks coming
from that direction,
same exact concept, same exact mechanism.
And you're familiar with the limitation
of a control has a single target action.
And sometimes if you've needed
to invoke multiple actions,
you've had to do that in your code,
have the control invoke your action,
and then you manually
invoke other actions.
Well, in Cocoa Touch,
we've extended this.
And we've added the support for
having multiple targets and actions.
So now in the demo that I'll do here,
we're going to have a second action
that's invoked on our controller,
which is the update label method.
And so you can have an arbitrary number
of actions triggered by different events.
They don't all have to be the same event.
You can hook different actions up to
different targets to different events.
So it's -- it's a nice set of flexibility
that's kind of grown out of Cocoa.
So with that stage set of the
language and now knowing how we
hook up the view to the controller,
let's actually write
a little bit of code.
And so these are the two things that
we're going to do is actually connect
the views graphically in Interface
Builder and then add action methods.
So let me go back to our demo.
I should point out
from our previous demo,
you can see we have our
beautiful icon here.
It has the lovely glass
reflection added automatically.
That wasn't in the icon itself.
So now to add the code,
let's have a look at some of the
classes that got created here.
Give myself a little room.
So here you see we have
the AppDelegate class.
This is in the template already.
If we look at the code briefly here,
you can see here's the application
didFinishLaunching method.
So we're all ready for just
hooking in whatever launching
logic you need to add in there.
We're not going to do
anything with the AppDelegate.
It works just fine as it is.
Where we're going to add our code
is over in the ViewController.
So this is our controller class.
And I'm going to add two
things in the header file.
The first is a handful
of instance variables,
one for the image view,
which was that light that
I dragged into the interface,
and the second is for the label that
was up at the top of the window.
And then in addition to
these instance variables,
I'm going to add declarations
for a couple action methods,
the toggle light and the update label
method that we saw a second ago.
And I wanted to point out a
little bit of the syntax here,
just because this historically has
caused some confusion for people,
and people seem to wrestle with it,
so I'll try to demystify some of it.
There are these IB outlet
and IB action keywords,
and those aren't part of the language,
those are just a little bit of syntax
that gives a hint to Interface Builder
that these things are items that
should appear in the lists in Interface
Builder that the user can connect to.
So in this case, the IB outlet for the
two instance variables,
those are outlets that can point
to user interface elements,
and the IB action indicates that these
are action methods that are going to be
used to connect to the user interface.
And then in addition to
these instance variables,
I'm going to add a little
bit of syntax here,
just because this historically has
caused some confusion for people,
and people seem to wrestle with it,
so I'll try to demystify some
of these instance variables,
those are outlets that can
point to user interface.
So now with those hints in place,
actually if we go over to
Interface Builder now-- actually,
let me get rid of the simulator there.
If we go back over to Interface Builder
to our demo view controller nib file,
I wanted to talk a little bit
about the objects that are here.
This files owner, again,
this is a concept that takes a little
bit of getting your head around.
But what the files owner is,
this icon is a representation of the
object that is loading this nib file.
And it gives us that icon that we
can graphically connect things to.
And those connections
are formed at runtime.
This object doesn't actually
live in the interface file.
We just have an icon here,
which at runtime,
the the real object is plugged into.
And in our case,
the files owner is our demo
view controller object,
the one that I just added a few instance
variables and action methods to.
And if we look at -- let
me bring up the view here.
If I select the files owner over
here and I go down to the connections
inspector under the tools menu,
we can see the list of things that
can be connected to this object.
And now this list contains those
items that I added in the header file,
namely the image view, the label,
and the two action methods down here.
So those are the pieces
that we're going to connect.
And first I'm going to add-- I'm going
to form connections for the outlets.
So for the image view,
I just drag from the little
connection circle here,
drag over to the light, and let go.
And that sets that connection.
And then for the label,
I just drag that over
to the label and let go.
And now we have those connections formed.
And when the nib file is loaded,
those instance variables will
be set to point to the objects
that are in the interface.
[Transcript missing]
And now we can see in the inspector
we have multiple target action
connections from our single switch
for the value changed event.
And I think those are all the
connections we need to make
since this is a simple app.
So I'm going to save the nib
file and we'll go back to Xcode
and now actually add some code.
And you can see from-- oops,
that won't be good.
Well, you can see in the template,
there's some methods here that are
implemented that you can choose to add,
extend if you need to.
But we're just adding these
two new action methods.
And like any good cooking show,
I have it ready in the oven.
So we have toggle light
and update method.
Both of these are basically the same.
Again, I'm just using this as a setting
the stage for the discussion.
In both of these cases,
the methods take a single argument,
which is the sender.
And the sender is the object
that is invoking this action.
In our case, it's the instance of
that UI switch object.
And so in both of these cases,
we're just going to ask,
is the switch on?
And if it is on,
we're going to do one thing.
And if it's off, we'll do something else.
In the case of when it's on,
we set the image of the image
view to the on PNG image.
And if it's off,
we set it to the off PNG image.
Those were two of the images
that I dragged in earlier.
And for the update label,
we do basically the same thing.
If the switch is on,
we set the text of the
label to one thing.
And otherwise,
we set it to something else.
And so now we've implemented our actions.
Let me save that, build and go.
And now hopefully-- there we go.
Now our light turns on,
the label changes at the top.
And you can see that single event,
the value changed, is triggering multiple
actions at the same time.
So that's, I think,
the rest of that demo.
Oh, and then as you saw yesterday,
In order to build it on the device,
we would just select the
device from the active SDK,
build and run, and would install it
on the actual device,
and we'd be off and running.
So now we've accomplished
goal number two.
And if we go back to the slides--
We can see the things that we saw
there were we connected the user
interface to the controller in the back.
We implemented a couple action methods,
and we used target action to
respond to an event in order to
invoke an action on our controller.
And we used multiple target
actions for a single control.
So a couple other points
about the actions.
You can define your
actions in three ways.
This is again an extension
from the Cocoa mechanism,
where we use the middle one,
which is the same one that Cocoa uses.
But there's a single sender argument.
You can also define the action
methods with no arguments if you
don't care who it's coming from.
Or if you need additional details
about the event that caused
this action to be invoked,
you can pass an optional
with event argument.
And then you can introspect the event
and see what was going on in more detail.
Our outlets that we hooked
up to the user interface get
defined as instance variables.
And again, just to drill this point home,
IB action, IB outlet,
these two lines are copy and
pasted from our source code.
They're nothing special.
IB outlet, in fact,
just disappears altogether.
IB action is synonymous with void.
So don't let that confuse you in any way.
It's really, really simple.
There are a couple sessions on
Interface Builder and designing apps.
There's an introductory one
and a more advanced one.
And then the third-- oh,
our session got renamed.
2D Graphics and Animations
for the iPhone and Mac.
Learn about animations.
If you're going to incorporate
animations into your application,
you can do so and learn
about controls and views.
And just to wrap up the make
it do something section.
So when you're writing Cocoa Touch code,
you're writing that in Objective-C.
Keep in mind that the lower level
frameworks are primarily C-based.
So you may have this mix of
Objective-C and C code if you're
using lower level frameworks.
And you're also free to use C++ if
you have existing classes that you
want to leverage on the iPhone.
You can bring those over and you
can intermix all three of these.
You have a lot of flexibility there.
Target action for control,
connecting your controls to invoking
actions in response to particular events.
And we used Interface Builder for
forming those connections graphically.
You can certainly do the,
make those connections.
In code, if you want,
it's just a heck of a lot
easier in NIV just to drag them.
So that's step number two.
We've made our app do something.
And that brings us to step
number three of expand it and
actually turn it into a real app.
And at this point,
you're faced with probably
one of two choices in which
direction you're going to go.
Either you'll probably go an
OpenGL direction if you're
doing game development,
say, or you may stick with the native
UI kit Cocoa Touch interfaces,
such as most of the apps
that we ship on the phone.
If you are doing game
development using OpenGL,
we have OpenGL ES 1.1.
If you have existing OpenGL ES stuff
from another platform,
another mobile platform, say,
you should be able to bring that over.
And we've seen a ton of these
games come over in no time because
they're implemented using OpenGL.
There's a session for game development
for the phone in particular,
and then a more general 3D graphics
for the phone using OpenGL ES.
So if you're doing game development,
these are of interest to you.
And we're not going to talk
much about the OpenGL stuff.
I'm not an OpenGL programmer.
We're going to talk about
the native interface side.
And as you expand your app,
one of the things that we found when
we expanded our apps and turned them
into real apps was we saw this design
approach kind of emerge of designing
our applications one screen at a time.
And you'll hear this a number of times
through the session of focusing on
presenting one screen of data at a time.
And here's an example of our clock
application where we have a small
number of features in the application,
each one presented in its own screen
with control at the bottom for the
user to switch between those screens.
So we just present one piece of
functionality in a screen at a time.
And this is a pretty common
design that we've seen emerge,
this kind of tab switching approach.
A second one that we've seen emerge
is a hierarchical navigation of data.
You see this in the iPod
application or in this example,
the app that's near and dear to my heart,
the Photos application,
where we have three primary
levels in the hierarchy.
We have the list of albums that the
user has in their photo library.
As they select one of the albums,
we drill down to a second level
that shows the thumbnails.
And then as they select
one of the thumbnails,
we go down to the full
screen display of that image.
So one screen at a time,
presenting specific
information along the way.
Another design aspect that we saw
emerge as we built these things
is the notion of coupling the
screen with a specific controller.
So a one-to-one mapping of a
screen full of content with the
controller that manages that screen.
In this case,
we have a library controller
that's solely responsible
for the list of albums.
We have a thumbnail controller,
which is just responsible for the
presentation of the thumbnails.
And then we have a separate controller
for the full screen display of
displaying just that one image.
And each controller is just responsible
for the screen full of content that
it's managing and responding to the
user as they interact with that.
So you can see we have this very
clear separation of the view
from the controller and sitting
behind that to roundup the screen.
And what we found out the model
view controller design is the
image database that we have of
images synced over from iTunes or
taken on the camera from the phone.
So very clearly delineated
model view controller pieces.
We practice what we preach.
And this notion of pairing the
screen full of data with the
controller gives you this nice
modular unit of functionality,
which then as a module can be
plugged together with other
modules in interesting ways.
So here we see these three are
plugged together hierarchically.
And in UIKit,
there's an object that facilitates
that hierarchical navigation,
which is in the view controller category.
We call it a navigation controller.
And it manages this navigation from
one unit of functionality to another,
where you're providing the logic
in that controller for any one
screen full of content at a time.
There's a second one
from the previous screen,
the tab controller, which facilitates
switching between the tabs.
Again, where each screen full
of content has a tab.
has its own controller.
This notion of the view controllers
that you write managing specific
screenfuls of content and the ones that
we provide to help with that fall under
this umbrella of view controllers.
And it's really, really important.
This is, I would say, this whole week,
one of the biggest goals that you should
have is understand view controllers,
understand how to use them efficiently,
how you should design your apps
using them in order to achieve this
one screenful of content at a time.
And to help with that,
there's a couple sessions that
you should absolutely go to.
These are not to be missed.
Understanding view controllers
is an introductory session.
Explains the design behind it,
kind of the basics of how they work,
what you do with them.
And then later in the week,
there's a mastering
iPhone view controllers,
which goes into a little bit more detail.
There's two labs for view controllers.
We think it's that
important we get two labs.
So come down, meet the engineers
that design this stuff,
the folks that are using it.
And then we'll have a little
bit of a discussion about how
we think you should use view
controllers for our applications.
Again, we'd love to discuss, you know,
the design of your application,
how we think you should use view
controllers for really effective use.
So view control is very important
in case you missed that point.
And then the rest-- excuse me.
The rest of the slides,
I just wanted to go through
some functional areas to kind
of call attention to them.
The first one, table views.
This is another very important UI element
that we see cropping up in a lot of our
apps and a lot of your apps as well.
So hierarchical presentation of data
is commonly done with a table view.
You can also use them just
for displaying straight lists.
They're highly customizable.
You can customize them
to suit your application.
There's a view controller that is
associated with table views for helping
manage that screen full of content.
There are two sessions, again,
an introductory and a more
advanced session for table views.
And there's also a lab for
table views that you can go to.
And then the next area is multi-touch.
So as I said,
the UI views are by default single touch.
If you do flip that switch
to enable multi-touch,
you can do some fascinating
things with multi-touch.
And I think we're just scratching the
surface of what apps will do with this.
There's a couple methods in UIView that
you can override for hooking into the
event processing system and getting
all the access to the details about the
touches and what's going on with them.
If you are going to be doing
multi-touch development,
I'd suggest going to
the multi-touch session.
It talks about gestures and events,
how they hook into the views,
what the overall process is.
The next one is a set of APIs that we
put under the umbrella of device APIs.
There are three of them.
The first one is the image
picker and the camera interface.
This is an example of a delegate-based
API where you create the image picker,
you bring it on screen,
and then the user navigates through
their library or takes a picture,
and then the delegate object
that you provide gets a callback.
Image picker controller
did finish picking image.
Here you can see an example
of one of our verbose APIs.
Hopefully, did finish picking image.
It's kind of clear
when that'll be called.
Another device API that
we have is Core Location.
So location-aware
software would use this.
Again, a delegate-based API.
The general idea is very simple.
You turn on the location manager,
indicating you are interested
in location events.
And as the device gets
a new fix on a location,
The delegate gets a call back,
did update to location, from location.
So you're given the old
and the new position.
And then you can do something with that.
The third one is the accelerometer.
A delegate-based API again.
You turn the accelerometer on,
and then at that point,
the delegate that you provide
gets this steady stream at a
fixed interval that you define,
indicating what's happening with the
sensor and what's being detected in
terms of the acceleration going on.
So accelerometer did accelerate.
There's a session that
covers the device APIs,
and it goes into details like
how do you actually process the
acceleration data that's given to you?
Or what are the details of the
locations that are handed to your
delegate when you get called back?
So it's a good session to go to if
you're using some of the device APIs.
And then the last one
was the address book.
So if you need to integrate contact
information into your application
or if you have contact-like
information that you want to present,
we have two levels of API here,
a lower level and a higher level.
The lower level gives you access
to the user's contact database in
a structured fashion so you don't
have to write SQLite directly.
You would use this if you have
contact information that you want to
fill into particular fields in the
contacts database that is relevant
to your application that would
be stored with a particular contact.
And then the high-level APIs are
the UI pieces for allowing
the user to pick a contact.
There's a people picker.
If you're creating new contacts,
you can show that to the user and let
them add it to an existing contact
or create a new contact for it.
Or if you just have contact
information that you want to
display in a consistent fashion with
how we display contact information,
the nice little rounded bubbles
where we have the addresses
and phone numbers or whatever,
we have API for that.
There's a session on Address
Book to give you all the details
about how to integrate contacts and
information into your application.
And so that's just a list
of a bunch of sessions.
As a parting thought, I just want to say,
remember the fundamentals.
Work with the frameworks,
not against them.
Take that step back.
Take the time to read some of
the documentation and really
understand the concepts that go
into the frameworks and the designs
that we've chosen to implement.
Learn the designs,
the three that we covered here,
Model View Controller,
so fundamental to all the
designs that we have both on the
phone as well as on the desktop.
Delegation,
where you can customize default
behavior in the frameworks,
and target action for connecting
the view to the controls.
And again,
for doing iPhone app development,
use the view controllers.
There's a ton of functionality
in the view controller
layer that you get for free.
We found as we developed our apps,
we would do the same thing over and over,
and actually we have a rule of three,
that on the third time we do it,
we stop and we factor it out.
So we've done that factoring,
and now all of that existing
behavior that's so generic to so
many apps is just there for you
to use through view controllers.
So for more information that
you didn't get from here or
in the labs that you'll go to,
you can contact Derek Horn,
our application technologies evangelist.
And with that,
I'd just like to say thank you.
Have a great week.
The engineers at Apple are thrilled to
see the apps that you guys are making.
We are seeing awesome
applications come out.
We're really excited to see what you
do with the frameworks we provide.
We're really interested in meeting you
in the labs and talking one-on-one.
So have a great week at WWDC.
Thank you very much.